Application: Polkadot Runtime Releaser (#2373)
w3f/Grants-Program: applications/polkadot-runtime-releaser.md

- **Team Name:** hack-ink
- **Payment Address:**
  - 156HGo9setPcU2qhFMVWLkcmtCEGySLwNqa3DaEiYSWtte4Y (AssetHub) USDC 50%
  - 156HGo9setPcU2qhFMVWLkcmtCEGySLwNqa3DaEiYSWtte4Y (Polkadot) DOT  50%
- **[Level](https://github.com/w3f/Grants-Program/tree/master#level_slider-levels):** 2

## Project Overview :page_facing_up:

### Overview

Polkadot Runtime Releaser aka PRR.

Since last year, my work is mainly focused on the chain/node maintenance.
Runtime upgrade is grate feature fo Polkadot-SDK.
But there are lots of potential issues that could happen during the runtime upgrade.
Especially to the new teams, they might not have enough experience to handle it.

- How to setup a try-runtime CI?
- How to setup the release CI?
  - The log affects the runtime file size.
  - The rustc/OS version affects the compiled artifacts.
  - There are also some unclear things of the srtool.
    - E.G. https://substrate.stackexchange.com/questions/11686/getting-error-rust-nightly-not-installed-when-starting-an-srtool-container-to-bu​a
- When to notify the community to upgrade the node?
  - Collator/Validator nodes should be upgraded first.
  - RPC suppliers should be upgraded later.

>     - I saw some EVM RPCs require the runtime version equals to the node version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - I saw some EVM RPCs require the runtime version to be equal to the node version.
```

> - How to host a wasm-override repository for community?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- How to host a wasm-override repository for the community?
```

It will have 2 branches, `foo` and `bar` if they have 2 networks, `foo`(mainnet) and `bar`(canary network).
It will host the override WASMs and the release under the corresponding network branch.

For collator/validator nodes, they should monitor the `foo-network/foo` repository release as usual.
For RPC suppliers or service node, they should monitor the `foo-network/foo-release` repository release, it's a more stable version. It will only be published once the on-chain runtime upgrade get confirmed.

PRR will supply these components, which will all be hosted in one repository.
- A GitHub Action to response the try-runtime. (Users can comment something like `/bot try-runtime <network>` under a release PR to trigger this action.)
- A GitHub Action to build the release runtime.
- A GitHub Action to notify release repository there is a new release that release repository can start preparing the override WASMs.
- A GitHub Action and a tool to monitor the on-chain runtime version and compare it with the release runtime version to trigger the release on the release repository.
- A tool to build and manage the override WASMs.

> Each component will have a very detailed guide to help the chain team to set up.

Reviewer: Could you structure this a bit better, so it's apparent which actions will be supported and what kind of use case they will cover?

For example:

| GitHub Action | Trigger  | Specification  |
| -----: | ------ | -------------- |
| `try-runtime` | by commenting `/bot try-runtime <network>` on the PR | when executed, XYZ will happen |

Author: Updated.

- **FTE:**  1
- **Costs:** 22,500 USD

| Number | Deliverable                   | Specification                                                                                                         |
| -----: | ----------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
|    0a. | License                       | GPLv3                                                                                                                 |
|    0b. | Documentation                 | There will be a guide to tell people how to use this.                                                                 |
|    0c. | Testing guide                 | There will be a guide and a demo repository to tell the auditor how to run the tests. All components will be covered. |
|     1. | Try-runtime CI                | Comment on a release PR and see the try-runtime result.                                                               |
|     2. | Release CI                    | Build and release the deterministic runtimes and the node files.                                                      |

> |     3. | WASM override tool            | It can build the specify feature WASM in one step and manage them well in the corresponding folder.                   |

Reviewer: > It can build the specify feature WASM

Could you ellaborate on that?

> manage them well in the corresponding folder.

Does that mean that the build will be stored on the github repo?

Author: > Does that mean that the build will be stored on the github repo?

Yes, that's pretty common. For example, https://github.com/moonbeam-foundation/moonbeam-runtime-overrides/tree/master/wasm.

Author: > Could you ellaborate on that?

Just as described, this is a versatile tool designed for compiling runtime with particular features. 

And I plan to utilize it for compiling the debug WASM and EVM tracing WASM within the GitHub Actions I previously referenced.

> |     4. | WASM override CI              | Listen the build request from release CI.                                                                             |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|     4. | WASM override CI              |  Listen for build requests from the release CI.                                                                             |
```

- **Contact Email:** x@acg.box
- **Website:** https://linktr.ee/aurevoirxavier

### Legal Structure

Personal. (no legal structure entry)

### Team's experience

[Xavier Lau](https://github.com/AurevoirXavier)

- Seven years of experience in Rust.
- Four years of experience in Substrate.
- Darwinia Network core developer, since 2019.
- Actively at [Substrate StackExchange](https://substrate.stackexchange.com/users/251/aurevoirxavier).
- Grants contributor, [Subalfred](https://github.com/hack-ink/subalfred), [Slothunter](https://github.com/hack-ink/slothunter).

### Team Code Repos

- https://github.com/hack-ink
- https://github.com/hack-ink/AiR
- https://github.com/hack-ink/array-bytes
- https://github.com/hack-ink/atomicalsir
- https://github.com/hack-ink/subalfred

Please also provide the GitHub accounts of all team members.
If they contain no activity, references to projects hosted elsewhere or live are also fine.

- https://github.com/AurevoirXavier

### Team LinkedIn Profiles (if available)

- https://www.linkedin.com/in/xavier-lau-b0655310a

### Overview

- **Total Estimated Duration:** 8 weeks
- **Full-Time Equivalent (FTE):**  1 FTE
- **Total Costs:** 22,500 USD

> ### Milestone 1 Slothunter CLI tool

Reviewer 2: I believe this is a copy-paste relict.

- **Estimated duration:** 8 weeks
- **FTE:**  1
- **Costs:** 22,500 USD

| Number | Deliverable                   | Specification                                                                                                         |
| -----: | ----------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
|    0a. | License                       | GPLv3                                                                                                                 |

> |    0b. | Documentation                 | There will be a guide to tell people how to use this.                                                                 |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|    0b. | Documentation                 | There will be a guide to tell people how to use this and inline docs will cover core functionalities.                                                                 |
```
